## 2.1. Names

The names of Go functions, variables, constants, types, statement labels, and packages follow a simple rule: a name begins with a letter (that is, anything that Unicode deems a letter) or an underscore and may have any number of additional letters, digits, and underscores. Case matters: `heapSort` and `Heapsort` are different names.  

Go has 25 [*keywords*](https://golang.org/ref/spec#Keywords) like `if` and `switch` that may be used only where the syntax permits; they can't be used as names.  
```
break        default      func         interface    select
case         defer        go           map          struct
chan         else         goto         package      switch
const        fallthrough  if           range        type
continue     for          import       return       var
```


In addition, there are about three dozen *predeclared* names like int and true for built-in constants, types, and functions:

Constants:
```
  true false iota nil
```

Types:
```
  int  int8  int16  int32  int64
  uint uint8 uint16 uint32 uint64 uintptr
  float32 float64 complex64 compled128
  bool byte rune string error
```

[Functions](https://golang.org/pkg/builtin/):
```
  make len cap new append copy close delete 
  complex real imag
  panic recover
```

These names are not reserved, so you may use them in declarations. We'll see a handful of places where redeclaring one of them makes sense, but beware of the potential for confusion.  

If an entity is declared within a function, it is *local* to that function. If declared outside of a function, however, it is visible in all files of the package to which it belongs. The case of the first letter of a name determines its visibility across package boundaries. If the name begins with an upper-case letter, it is *exported*, which means that it is visible and accessible outside of its own package and may be referred to by other parts of the program, as with Printf in the fmt package. Package names themselves are always in lower case.  

There is no limit on name length, but convention and style in Go programs lean toward short names, especially for local variables with small scopes; you are much more likely to see variables named `i` than `theLoopIndex`. Generally, the larger the scope of a name, the longer and more meaningful it should be.  

Stylistically, Go programmers use *"camel case"* when forming names by combining words; that is, interior capital letters are preferred over interior underscores. Thus the standard libraries have functions with names like `QuoteRuneToASCII` and `parseRequestLine` but never `quote_rune_to_ASCII` or `parse_request_line`. The letters of acronyms and initialisms like ASCII and HTML are always rendered in the same case, so a function might be called `htmlEscape`, `HTMLEscape`, or `escapeHTML`, but not `escapeHtml`.  
