## 2.2. Declarations

A *declaration* names a program entity and specifies some or all of its properties. There are four major kinds of declarations: var, const, type, and func. We'll talk about variables and types in this chapter, constants in Chapter 3, and functions in Chapter 5.

A Go program is stored in one or more files whose names end in `.go`. Each file begins with a `package` declaration that says what package the file is part of. The `package` declaration is followed by any `import` declarations, and then a sequence of *package-level* declarations of types, variables, constants, and functions, in any order. For example, this program declares a constant, a function, and a couple of variables:  
```go
// gopl.io/ch2/boiling
// Boiling prints the boiling point of water.
package main

import "fmt"

const boilingF = 212.0

func main() {
	var f = boilingF
	var c = (f - 32) * 5 / 9
	fmt.Printf("boiling point = %g°F or %g°C\n", f, c)
	// Output:
	// boiling point = 212°F or 100°C
}
```

The constant `boilingF` is a package-level declaration (as is `main`), whereas the variables `f` and `c` are local to the function `main`. The name of each package-level entity is visible not only throughout the source file that contains its declaration, but throughout all the files of the package. By contrast, local declarations are visible only within the function in which they are declared and perhaps only within a small part of it.  

<!-- A function declaration has a name, a list of parameters (the variables whose values are provided by the function's callers), an optional list of results, and the function body, which contains the statements that define what the function does. The result list is omitted if the function does not return anything. Execution of the function begins with the first statement and continues until it encounters a return statement or reaches the end of a function that has no results. Control and any results are then returned to the caller.   -->
A function declaration has:
- a name 
- a list of *parameters* (the variables whose values are provided by the function's callers) 
- an optional list of results
- the function *body* (which contains the statements that define what the function does)

The result list is omitted if the function does not return anything. Execution of the function begins with the first statement and continues until it encounters a return statement or reaches the end of a function that has no results. Control and any results are then returned to the caller.  

We've seen a fair number of functions already and there are lots more to come, including an extensive discussion in Chapter 5, so this is only a sketch. The function `fToC` below encapsulates the temperature conversion logic so that it is defined only once but may be used from multiple places. Here `main` calls it twice, using the values of two different local constants:  
```go
// gopl.io/ch2/ftoc
// Ftoc prints two Fahrenheit-to-Celsius conversions.
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
	const freezingF, boilingF = 32.0, 212.0
	fmt.Printf("%g°F = %g°C\n", freezingF, fToC(freezingF)) // "32°F = 0°C"
	fmt.Printf("%g°F = %g°C\n", boilingF, fToC(boilingF))   // "212°F = 100°C"
}

func fToC(f float64) float64 {
	return (f - 32) * 5 / 9
}
```
