## 2.5. Type Declarations 

The type of a variable or expression defines the characteristics of the values it may take on, such as their size (number of bits or number of elements, perhaps), how they are represented internally, the intrinsic operations that can be performed on them, and the methods associated with them.  

In any program there are variables that share the same representation but signify very different concepts. For instance, an int could be used to represent a loop index, a timestamp, a file descriptor, or a month; a `float64` could represent a velocity in meters per second or a temperature in one of several scales; and a `string` could represent a password or the name of a color.

A `type` declaration defines a new *named type* that has the same underlying type as an existing type. The named type provides a way to separate different and perhaps incompatible uses of the *underlying type* so that they can't be mixed unintentionally.
```go
  type name underlyingType
```

Type declarations most often appear at package level, where the named type is visible throughout the package, and if the name is exported (it starts with an upper-case letter), it's accessible from other packages as well.  

To illustrate type declarations, let's turn the different temperature scales into different types:
```go
// tgpl.io ch2/tempconv0
// Package tempconv performs Celsius and Fahrenheit temperature computations.
package tempconv

import "fmt"

type Celsius float64
type Fahrenheit float64

const (
	AbsoluteZeroC Celsius = -273.15
	FreezingC     Celsius = 0
	BoilingC      Celsius = 100
)

func CToF(c Celsius) Fahrenheit { return Fahrenheit(c*9/5 + 32) }

func FToC(f Fahrenheit) Celsius { return Celsius((f - 32) * 5 / 9) }
```
This package defines two types, `Celsius` and `Fahrenheit`, for the two units of temperature. Even though both have the same underlying type, `float64`, they are not the same type, so they cannot be compared or combined in arithmetic expressions. Distinguishing the types makes it possible to avoid errors like inadvertently combining temperatures in the two different scales; an explicit *type conversion* like `Celsius(t)` or `Fahrenheit(t)` is required to convert from a `float64`. `Celsius(t)` and `Fahrenheit(t)` are conversions, not function calls. They don't change the value or representation in any way, but they make the change of meaning explicit. On the other hand, the functions `CToF` and `FToC` convert between the two scales; they *do* return different values.  

For every type `T`, there is a corresponding conversion operation `T(x)` that converts the value `x` to type `T`. A conversion from one type to another is allowed if both have the same underlying type, or if both are unnamed pointer types that point to variables of the same underlying type; these conversions change the type but not the representation of the value. If `x` is assignable to `T`, a conversion is permitted but is usually redundant.

Conversions are also allowed between numeric types, and between string and some slice types, as we will see in the next chapter. These conversions may change the representation of the value. For instance, converting a floating-point number to an integer discards any fractional part, and converting a string to a `[]byte` slice allocates a copy of the string data. In any case, a conversion never fails at run time.  

The underlying type of a named type determines its structure and representation, and also the set of intrinsic operations it supports, which are the same as if the underlying type had been used directly. That means that arithmetic operators work the same for `Celsius` and `Fahrenheit` as they do for `float64`, as you might expect.
```go
  fmt.Printf("%g\n", BoilingC-FreezingC) // "100" °C
  boilingF := CToF(BoilingC)
  fmt.Printf("%g\n", boilingF-CToF(FreezingC)) // "180" °F
  fmt.Printf("%g\n", boilingF-FreezingC)       // compile error: type mismatch
```

Comparison operators like `==` and `<` can also be used to compare a value of a named type to another of the same type, or to a value of the underlying type. But two values of different named types cannot be compared directly:
```go
  var c Celsius
  var f Fahrenheit
  fmt.Println(c == 0)          // "true"
  fmt.Println(f >= 0)          // "true"
  fmt.Println(c == f)          // compile error: type mismatch
  fmt.Println(c == Celsius(f)) // "true"!
```

Note the last case carefully. In spite of its name, the type conversion `Celsius(f)` does not change the value of its argument, just its type. The test is true because `c` and `f` are both zero.  

A named type may provide notational convenience if it helps avoid writing out complex types over and over again. The advantage is small when the underlying type is simple like `float64`, but big for complicated types, as we will see when we discuss structs.    

Named types also make it possible to define new behaviors for values of the type. These behaviors are expressed as a set of functions associated with the type, called the type's methods. We'll look at *methods* in detail in Chapter 6 but will give a taste of the mechanism here.  

The declaration below, in which the `Celsius` parameter `c` appears before the function name, associates with the `Celsius` type a method named `String` that returns c's numeric value followed by °C:  
```go
  func (c Celsius) String() string { return fmt.Sprintf("%g°C", c) }
```

Many types declare a `String` method of this form because it controls how values of the type appear when printed as a string by the fmt package, as we will see in Section 7.1.  
```go
  c := FToC(212.0)
  fmt.Println(c.String()) // "100°C"
  fmt.Printf("%v\n", c)   // "100°C"; no need to call String explicitly
  fmt.Printf("%s\n", c)   // "100°C"
  fmt.Println(c)          // "100°C"
  fmt.Printf("%g\n", c)   // "100"; does not call String
  fmt.Println(float64(c)) // "100"; does not call String
```
