## 2.7. Scope

A declaration associates a name with a program entity, such as a function or a variable. The *scope* of a declaration is the part of the source code where a use of the declared name refers to that declaration.  
Don’t confuse scope with lifetime. The scope of a declaration is a region of the program text; it is a compile-time property. The lifetime of a variable is the range of time during execution when the variable can be referred to by other parts of the program; it is a run-time property.  

A syntactic *block* is a sequence of statements enclosed in braces like those that surround the body of a function or loop. A name declared inside a syntactic block is not visible outside that block. The block encloses its declarations and determines their scope. We can generalize this notion of blocks to include other groupings of declarations that are not explicitly surrounded by braces in the source code; we’ll call them all *lexical blocks*. There is a lexical block for the entire source code, called the *universe block*; for each package; for each file; for each `for`, `if`, and `switch` statement; for each case in a `switch` or `select` statement; and, of course, for each explicit syntactic block. 

A declaration’s lexical block determines its scope, which may be large or small. The declarations of built-in types, functions, and constants like `int`, `len`, and `true` are in the universe block and can be referred to throughout the entire program. Declarations outside any function, that is, at *package level*, can be referred to from any file in the same package. Imported packages, such as `fmt` in the `tempconv` example, are declared at the *file level*, so they can be referred to from the same file, but not from another file in the same package without another `import`. Many declarations, like that of the variable `c` in the `tempconv.CToF` function, are *local*, so they can be referred to only from within the same function or perhaps just a part of it.

The scope of a control-flow label, as used by `break`, `continue`, and `goto` statements, is the entire enclosing function.

A program may contain multiple declarations of the same name so long as each declaration is in a different lexical block. For example, you can declare a local variable with the same name as a package-level variable. Or, as shown in Section 2.3.3, you can declare a function parameter called `new`, even though a function of this name is predeclared in the universe block. Don’t overdo it, though; the larger the scope of the redeclaration, the more likely you are to surprise the reader.

When the compiler encounters a reference to a name, it looks for a declaration, starting with the innermost enclosing lexical block and working up to the universe block. If the compiler finds no declaration, it reports an "undeclared name" error. If a name is declared in both an outer block and an inner block, the inner declaration will be found first. In that case, the inner declaration is said to *shadow* or *hide* the outer one, making it inaccessible:
```go
  func f() {}

  var g = "g"

  func main() {
      f := "f"
      fmt.Println(h) // compile error: undefined: h
      fmt.Println(f) // "f"; local var f shadows package-level func f 
      fmt.Println(g) // "g"; package-level var
  }
```

Within a function, lexical blocks may be nested to arbitrary depth, so one local declaration can shadow another. Most blocks are created by control-flow constructs like `if` statements and `for` loops. The program below has three different variables called `x` because each declaration appears in a different lexical block. (This example illustrates scope rules, not good style!)
```go
  func main() {
      x := "hello!"
      for i := 0; i < len(x); i++ {
          x := x[i]
          if x != '!' {
              x := x + 'A' - 'a'
              fmt.Printf("%c", x) // "HELLO" (one letter per iteration)
          }
      }
  }
```
The expressions `x[i]` and `x + 'A' - 'a'` each refer to a declaration of `x` from an outer block; we’ll explain that in a moment. (Note that the latter expression is *not* equivalent to `unicode.ToUpper`.)

As mentioned above, not all lexical blocks correspond to explicit brace-delimited sequences of statements; some are merely implied. The `for` loop above creates two lexical blocks: the explicit block for the loop body, and an implicit block that additionally encloses the variables declared by the initialization clause, such as `i`. The scope of a variable declared in the implicit block is the condition, post-statement (`i++`), and body of the `for` statement.

The example below also has three variables named `x`, each declared in a different block—one in the function body, one in the `for` statement’s block, and one in the loop body—but only two of the blocks are explicit:
```go
  func main() {
      x := "hello"
      for _, x := range x {
          x := x + 'A' - 'a'
          fmt.Printf("%c", x) // "HELLO" (one letter per iteration)
      } 
  }
```

Like `for` loops, `if` statements and `switch` statements also create implicit blocks in addition to their body blocks. The code in the following `if`-`else` chain shows the scope of `x` and `y`:
```go
  if x := f(); x == 0 {
      fmt.Println(x)
  } else if y := g(x); x == y {
      fmt.Println(x, y)
  } else {
      fmt.Println(x, y)
  }
  fmt.Println(x, y) // compile error: x and y are not visible here
```

The second `if` statement is nested within the first, so variables declared within the first statement’s initializer are visible within the second. Similar rules apply to each case of a `switch` statement: there is a block for the condition and a block for each case body.

At the package level, the order in which declarations appear has no effect on their scope, so a declaration may refer to itself or to another that follows it, letting us declare recursive or mutually recursive types and functions. The compiler will report an error if a constant or variable declaration refers to itself, however.

In this program:
```go
  if f, err := os.Open(fname); err != nil { // compile error: unused: f
      return err
  }
  f.ReadByte() // compile error: undefined f
  f.Close()    // compile error: undefined f
```
the scope of `f` is just the `if` statement, so `f` is not accessible to the statements that follow, resulting in compiler errors. Depending on the compiler, you may get an additional error reporting that the local variable `f` was never used.

Thus it is often necessary to declare `f` before the condition so that it is accessible after:
```go
  f, err := os.Open(fname)
  if err != nil {
      return err
  }
  f.ReadByte()
  f.Close()
```

You may be tempted to avoid declaring `f` and `err` in the outer block by moving the calls to `ReadByte` and `Close` inside an else block:
```go
  if f, err := os.Open(fname); err != nil {
      return err
  } else {
      // f and err are visible here too
      f.ReadByte()
      f.Close()
  }
```
but normal practice in Go is to deal with the error in the `if` block and then return, so that the successful execution path is not indented.

Short variable declarations demand an awareness of scope. Consider the program below, which starts by obtaining its current working directory and saving it in a package-level variable. This could be done by calling `os.Getwd` in function `main`, but it might be better to separate this concern from the primary logic, especially if failing to get the directory is a fatal error. The function `log.Fatalf` prints a message and calls `os.Exit(1)`.

```go
  var cwd string

  func init() {
      cwd, err := os.Getwd() // compile error: unused: cwd
      if err != nil {
          log.Fatalf("os.Getwd failed: %v", err)
      } 
  }
```
Since neither `cwd` nor `err` is already declared in the `init` function’s block, the `:=` statement declares both of them as local variables. The inner declaration of `cwd` makes the outer one inaccessible, so the statement does not update the package-level `cwd` variable as intended.  

Current Go compilers detect that the local `cwd` variable is never used and report this as an error, but they are not strictly required to perform this check. Furthermore, a minor change, such as the addition of a logging statement that refers to the local `cwd` would defeat the check.  
```go
  var cwd string

  func init() {
      cwd, err := os.Getwd() // NOTE: wrong!
      if err != nil {
          log.Fatalf("os.Getwd failed: %v", err)
      }
      log.Printf("Working directory = %s", cwd)
  }
```

The global cwd variable remains uninitialized, and the apparently normal log output obfuscates the bug.

There are a number of ways to deal with this potential problem. The most direct is to avoid `:=` by declaring `err` in a separate `var` declaration:
```go
  var cwd string

  func init() {
      var err error
      cwd, err = os.Getwd()
      if err != nil {
          log.Fatalf("os.Getwd failed: %v", err)
      }
  }
```

We’ve now seen how packages, files, declarations, and statements express the structure of programs. In the next two chapters, we’ll look at the structure of data.
