## 5.3. Multiple Return Values 

A function can return more than one result. We’ve seen many examples of functions from standard packages that return two values, the desired computational result and an error value or boolean that indicates whether the computation worked. The next example shows how to write one of our own.

The program below is a variation of `findlinks` that makes the HTTP request itself so that we no longer need to run `fetch`. Because the HTTP and parsing operations can fail, `findLinks` declares two results: the list of discovered links and an error. Incidentally, the HTML parser can usually recover from bad input and construct a document containing error nodes, so `Parse` rarely fails; when it does, it’s typically due to underlying I/O errors.
```go
// gopl.io/ch5/findlinks2
func main() {
	for _, url := range os.Args[1:] {
		links, err := findLinks(url)
		if err != nil {
			fmt.Fprintf(os.Stderr, "findlinks2: %v\n", err)
			continue
		}
		for _, link := range links {
			fmt.Println(link)
		}
	}
}

// findLinks performs an HTTP GET request for url, parses the
// response as HTML, and extracts and returns the links.
func findLinks(url string) ([]string, error) {
	resp, err := http.Get(url)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}
	if resp.StatusCode != http.StatusOK {
		resp.Body.Close()
		return nil, fmt.Errorf("getting %s: %s", url, resp.Status)
	}
	doc, err := html.Parse(resp.Body)
	resp.Body.Close()
	if err != nil {
		return nil, fmt.Errorf("parsing %s as HTML: %v", url, err)
	}
	return visit(nil, doc), nil
}
```
There are four return statements in `findLinks`, each of which returns a pair of values. The first three `returns` cause the function to pass the underlying errors from the `http` and `html` packages on to the caller. In the first case, the error is returned unchanged; in the second and third, it is augmented with additional context information by `fmt.Errorf` (§7.8). If `findLinks` is successful, the final return statement returns the slice of links, with no error.

We must ensure that `resp.Body` is closed so that network resources are properly released even in case of error. Go’s garbage collector recycles unused memory, but do not assume it will release unused operating system resources like open files and network connections. They should be closed explicitly.

The result of calling a multi-valued function is a tuple of values. The caller of such a function must explicitly assign the values to variables if any of them are to be used:
```go
  links, err := findLinks(url)
```
To ignore one of the values, assign it to the blank identifier:
```go
  links, _ := findLinks(url) // errors ignored
```
The result of a multi-valued call may itself be returned from a (multi-valued) calling function, as in this function that behaves like findLinks but logs its argument:
```go
  func findLinksLog(url string) ([]string, error) {
      log.Printf("findLinks %s", url)
      return findLinks(url)
  }
```
A multi-valued call may appear as the sole argument when calling a function of multiple parameters. Although rarely used in production code, this feature is sometimes convenient during debugging since it lets us print all the results of a call using a single statement. The two print statements below have the same effect.
```go
  log.Println(findLinks(url))
  
  links, err := findLinks(url)
  log.Println(links, err)
```

Well-chosen names can document the significance of a function's results. Names are particularly valuable when a function returns multiple results of the same type, like
```go
  func Size(rect image.Rectangle) (width, height int)
  func Split(path string) (dir, file string)
  func HourMinSec(t time.Time) (hour, minute, second int)
```
but it’s not always necessary to name multiple results solely for documentation. For instance, convention dictates that a final `bool` result indicates success; an `error` result often needs no explanation.

In a function with named results, the operands of a return statement may be omitted. This is called a *bare return*.
```go
  // CountWordsAndImages does an HTTP GET request for the HTML
  // document url and returns the number of words and images in it.
  func CountWordsAndImages(url string) (words, images int, err error) {
      resp, err := http.Get(url)
      if err != nil {
          return
      }
      doc, err := html.Parse(resp.Body)
      resp.Body.Close()
      if err != nil {
          err = fmt.Errorf("parsing HTML: %s", err)
          return
      }
      words, images = countWordsAndImages(doc)
      return
  }
  
  func countWordsAndImages(n *html.Node) (words, images int) { /* ... */ }
```
A bare return is a shorthand way to return each of the named result variables in order, so in the function above, each return statement is equivalent to
```go
  return words, images, err
```
In functions like this one, with many return statements and several results, bare returns can reduce code duplication, but they rarely make code easier to understand. For instance, it’s not obvious at first glance that the two early returns are equivalent to `return 0, 0, err` (because the result variables `words` and `images` are initialized to their zero values) and that the final `return` is equivalent to `return words, images, nil`. For this reason, bare returns are best used sparingly.

#### Exercises
- **Exercise 5.5**: Implement `countWordsAndImages`. (See Exercise 4.9 for word-splitting.) 
- **Exercise 5.6**: Modify the corner function in `gopl.io/ch3/surface` (§3.2) to use named
results and a bare return statement.
