## 5.6. Anonymous Functions 

Named functions can be declared only at the package level, but we can use a *function literal* to denote a function value within any expression. A function literal is written like a function declaration, but without a name following the func keyword. It is an expression, and its value is called an *anonymous function*.

Function literals let us define a function at its point of use. As an example, the earlier call to `strings.Map` can be rewritten as
```go
  strings.Map(func(r rune) rune { return r + 1 }, "HAL-9000")
```
More importantly, functions defined in this way have access to the entire lexical environment, so the inner function can refer to variables from the enclosing function, as this example shows:
```go
// gopl.io/ch5/squares
// squares returns a function that returns
// the next square number each time it is called.
func squares() func() int {
	var x int
	return func() int {
		x++
		return x * x
	}
}

func main() {
	f := squares()
	fmt.Println(f()) // "1"
	fmt.Println(f()) // "4"
	fmt.Println(f()) // "9"
	fmt.Println(f()) // "16"
}
```

The function squares returns another function, of type `func() int`. A call to squares creates a local variable `x` and returns an anonymous function that, each time it is called, increments `x` and returns its square. A second call to `squares` would create a second variable `x` and return a new anonymous function which increments that variable.

The `squares` example demonstrates that function values are not just code but can have state. The anonymous inner function can access and update the local variables of the enclosing function `squares`. These hidden variable references are why we classify functions as reference types and why function values are not comparable. Function values like these are imple- mented using a technique called *closures*, and Go programmers often use this term for func- tion values.

Here again we see an example where the lifetime of a variable is not determined by its scope: the variable `x` exists after `squares` has returned within `main`, even though `x` is hidden inside `f`.

As a somewhat academic example of anonymous functions, consider the problem of computing a sequence of computer science courses that satisfies the prerequisite requirements of each one. The prerequisites are given in the `prereqs` table below, which is a mapping from each course to the list of courses that must be completed before it.
```go
// gopl.io/ch5/toposort
// prereqs maps computer science courses to their prerequisites.
var prereqs = map[string][]string{
	"algorithms": {"data structures"},
	"calculus":   {"linear algebra"},

	"compilers": {
		"data structures",
		"formal languages",
		"computer organization",
	},

	"data structures":       {"discrete math"},
	"databases":             {"data structures"},
	"discrete math":         {"intro to programming"},
	"formal languages":      {"discrete math"},
	"networks":              {"operating systems"},
	"operating systems":     {"data structures", "computer organization"},
	"programming languages": {"data structures", "computer organization"},
}
```
This kind of problem is known as *topological sorting*. Conceptually, the prerequisite information forms a directed graph with a node for each course and edges from each course to the courses that it depends on. The graph is acyclic: there is no path from a course that leads back to itself. We can compute a valid sequence using depth-first search through the graph with the code below:
```go
func main() {
	for i, course := range topoSort(prereqs) {
		fmt.Printf("%d:\t%s\n", i+1, course)
	}
}

func topoSort(m map[string][]string) []string {
	var order []string
	seen := make(map[string]bool)
	var visitAll func(items []string)

	visitAll = func(items []string) {
		for _, item := range items {
			if !seen[item] {
				seen[item] = true
				visitAll(m[item])
				order = append(order, item)
			}
		}
	}

	var keys []string
	for key := range m {
		keys = append(keys, key)
	}

	sort.Strings(keys)
	visitAll(keys)
	return order
}
```
When an anonymous function requires recursion, as in this example, we must first declare a variable, and then assign the anonymous function to that variable. Had these two steps been combined in the declaration, the function literal would not be within the scope of the variable visitAll so it would have no way to call itself recursively:
```go
  visitAll := func(items []string) {
      // ...
      visitAll(m[item]) // compile error: undefined: visitAll
      // ...
  }
```
The output of the `toposort` program is shown below. It is deterministic, an often-desirable property that doesn’t always come for free. Here, the values of the prereqs map are slices, not more maps, so their iteration order is deterministic, and we sorted the keys of `prereqs` before making the initial calls to `visitAll`.
```
  1:      intro to programming
  2:      discrete math
  3:      data structures
  4:      algorithms
  5:      linear algebra
  6:      calculus
  7:      formal languages
  8:      computer organization
  9:      compilers
  10:     databases
  11:     operating systems
  12:     networks
  13:     programming languages
```
Let’s return to our `findLinks` example. We’ve moved the link-extraction function `links.Extract` to its own package, since we’ll use it again in Chapter 8. We replaced the `visit` function with an anonymous function that appends to the `links` slice directly, and used `forEachNode` to handle the traversal. Since Extract needs only the `pre` function, it passes `nil` for the `post` argument.
```go
// gopl/ch5/links
// Package links provides a link-extraction function.
package links

import (
	"fmt"
	"net/http"

	"golang.org/x/net/html"
)

// Extract makes an HTTP GET request to the specified URL, parses
// the response as HTML, and returns the links in the HTML document.
func Extract(url string) ([]string, error) {
	resp, err := http.Get(url)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}
	if resp.StatusCode != http.StatusOK {
		resp.Body.Close()
		return nil, fmt.Errorf("getting %s: %s", url, resp.Status)
	}

	doc, err := html.Parse(resp.Body)
	resp.Body.Close()
	if err != nil {
		return nil, fmt.Errorf("parsing %s as HTML: %v", url, err)
	}

	var links []string
	visitNode := func(n *html.Node) {
		if n.Type == html.ElementNode && n.Data == "a" {
			for _, a := range n.Attr {
				if a.Key != "href" {
					continue
				}
				link, err := resp.Request.URL.Parse(a.Val)
				if err != nil {
					continue // ignore bad URLs
				}
				links = append(links, link.String())
			}
		}
	}
	forEachNode(doc, visitNode, nil)
	return links, nil
}
```
Instead of appending the raw `href` attribute value to the `links` slice, this version parses it as a URL relative to the base URL of the document, `resp.Request.URL`. The resulting `link` is in absolute form, suitable for use in a call to `http.Get`.

Crawling the web is, at its heart, a problem of graph traversal. The `topoSort` example showed a depth-first traversal; for our web crawler, we’ll use breadth-first traversal, at least initially. In Chapter 8, we’ll explore concurrent traversal.

The function below encapsulates the essence of a breadth-first traversal. The caller provides an initial list `worklist` of items to visit and a function value `f` to call for each item. Each item is identified by a string. The function `f` returns a list of new items to append to the worklist. The `breadthFirst` function returns when all items have been visited. It maintains a set of strings to ensure that no item is visited twice.
```go
// gopl.io/ch5/findlinks3
// breadthFirst calls f for each item in the worklist.
// Any items returned by f are added to the worklist.
// f is called at most once for each item.
func breadthFirst(f func(item string) []string, worklist []string) {
	seen := make(map[string]bool)
	for len(worklist) > 0 {
		items := worklist
		worklist = nil
		for _, item := range items {
			if !seen[item] {
				seen[item] = true
				worklist = append(worklist, f(item)...)
			}
		}
	}
}
```
As we explained in passing in Chapter 3, the argument `"f(item)..."` causes all the items in the list returned by `f` to be appended to the `worklist`.

In our crawler, items are URLs. The crawl function we’ll supply to `breadthFirst` prints the URL, extracts its links, and returns them so that they too are visited.
```go
  func crawl(url string) []string {
      fmt.Println(url)
      list, err := links.Extract(url)
      if err != nil {
          log.Print(err)
      }
      return list
  }
```
To start the crawler off, we’ll use the command-line arguments as the initial URLs.
```go
  func main() {
      // Crawl the web breadth-first,
      // starting from the command-line arguments.
      breadthFirst(crawl, os.Args[1:])
  }
```
Let’s crawl the web starting from `https://golang.org`. Here are some of the resulting links:
```
  $ go build gopl.io/ch5/findlinks3
  $ ./findlinks3 https://golang.org
  https://golang.org/
  https://golang.org/doc/
  https://golang.org/pkg/
  https://golang.org/project/
  https://code.google.com/p/go-tour/
  https://golang.org/doc/code.html
  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XCsL89YtqCs
  http://research.swtch.com/gotour
  https://vimeo.com/53221560
  ...
```
The process ends when all reachable web pages have been crawled or the memory of the computer is exhausted.

### Exercises
- **Exercise 5.10**: Rewrite `topoSort` to use maps instead of slices and eliminate the initial sort. Verify that the results, though nondeterministic, are valid topological orderings.
- **Exercise 5.11**: The instructor of the linear algebra course decides that calculus is now a prerequisite. Extend the `topoSort` function to report cycles.
- **Exercise 5.12**: The `startElement` and `endElement` functions in `gopl.io/ch5/outline2` (§5.5) share a global variable, `depth`. Turn them into anonymous functions that share a variable local to the `outline` function.
- **Exercise 5.13**: Modify `crawl` to make local copies of the pages it finds, creating directories as necessary. Don’t make copies of pages that come from a different domain. For example, if the original page comes from `golang.org`, save all files from there, but exclude ones from `vimeo.com`.
- **Exercise 5.14**: Use the `breadthFirst` function to explore a different structure. For example, you could use the course dependencies from the `topoSort` example (a directed graph), the file system hierarchy on your computer (a tree), or a list of bus or subway routes downloaded from your city government’s web site (an undirected graph).


### 5.6.1. Caveat: Capturing Iteration Variables

In this section, we’ll look at a pitfall of Go’s lexical scope rules that can cause surprising results. We urge you to understand the problem before proceeding, because the trap can ensnare even experienced programmers.

Consider a program that must create a set of directories and later remove them. We can use a slice of function values to hold the clean-up operations. (For brevity, we have omitted all error handling in this example.)
```go
  var rmdirs []func()
  for _, d := range tempDirs() {
      dir := d               // NOTE: necessary!
      os.MkdirAll(dir, 0755) // creates parent directories too
      rmdirs = append(rmdirs, func() {
          os.RemoveAll(dir)
      })
  }
  // ...do some work...
  for _, rmdir := range rmdirs {
      rmdir() // clean up
  }
```
You may be wondering why we assigned the loop variable `d` to a new local variable `dir` within the loop body, instead of just naming the loop variable `dir` as in this subtly incorrect variant:
```go
  var rmdirs []func()
  for _, dir := range tempDirs() {
      os.MkdirAll(dir, 0755)
      rmdirs = append(rmdirs, func() {
          os.RemoveAll(dir) // NOTE: incorrect!
      }) 
  }
```
The reason is a consequence of the scope rules for loop variables. In the program immediately above, the `for` loop introduces a new lexical block in which the variable `dir` is declared. All function values created by this loop "capture" and share the same variable; an addressable storage location, not its value at that particular moment. The value of `dir` is updated in successive iterations, so by the time the cleanup functions are called, the dir variable has been updated several times by the now-completed `for` loop. Thus `dir` holds the value from the final iteration, and consequently all calls to `os.RemoveAll` will attempt to remove the same directory.

Frequently, the inner variable introduced to work around this problem (`dir` in our example) is given the exact same name as the outer variable of which it is a copy, leading to odd-looking but crucial variable declarations like this:
```go
  for _, dir := range tempDirs() {
      dir := dir // declares inner dir, initialized to outer dir
      // ...
  }
```
The risk is not unique to `range`-based `for` loops. The loop in the example below suffers from the same problem due to unintended capture of the index variable `i`.
```go
  var rmdirs []func()
  dirs := tempDirs()
  for i := 0; i < len(dirs); i++ {
      os.MkdirAll(dirs[i], 0755) // OK
      rmdirs = append(rmdirs, func() {
          os.RemoveAll(dirs[i]) // NOTE: incorrect!
      }) 
  }
```
The problem of iteration variable capture is most often encountered when using the `go` statement (Chapter 8) or with `defer` (which we will see in a moment) since both may delay the execution of a function value until after the loop has finished. But the problem is not inherent to `go` or `defer`.
