## 5.7. Variadic Functions 

A *variadic function* is one that can be called with varying numbers of arguments. The most familiar examples are `fmt.Printf` and its variants. `Printf` requires one fixed argument at the beginning, then accepts any number of subsequent arguments.

To declare a variadic function, the type of the final parameter is preceded by an ellipsis, "...", which indicates that the function may be called with any number of arguments of this type.
```go
// gopl.io/ch5/sum
func sum(vals ...int) int {
	total := 0
	for _, val := range vals {
		total += val
	}
	return total
}
```
The `sum` function above returns the sum of zero or more `int` arguments. Within the body of the function, the type of `vals` is an `[]int` slice. When `sum` is called, any number of values may be provided for its `vals` parameter.
```go
  fmt.Println(sum())           //  "0"
  fmt.Println(sum(3))          //  "3"
  fmt.Println(sum(1, 2, 3, 4)) //  "10"
```
Implicitly, the caller allocates an array, copies the arguments into it, and passes a slice of the entire array to the function. The last call above thus behaves the same as the call below, which shows how to invoke a variadic function when the arguments are already in a slice: place an ellipsis after the final argument.
```go
  values := []int{1, 2, 3, 4}
  fmt.Println(sum(values...)) // "10"
```

Although the `...int` parameter behaves like a slice within the function body, the type of a variadic function is distinct from the type of a function with an ordinary slice parameter.
```go
  func f(...int) {}
  func g([]int)  {}
  fmt.Printf("%T\n", f) // "func(...int)"
  fmt.Printf("%T\n", g) // "func([]int)"
```
Variadic functions are often used for string formatting. The `errorf` function below constructs a formatted error message with a line number at the beginning. The suffix `f` is a widely followed naming convention for variadic functions that accept a `Printf`-style format string.
```go
  func errorf(linenum int, format string, args ...interface{}) {
      fmt.Fprintf(os.Stderr, "Line %d: ", linenum)
      fmt.Fprintf(os.Stderr, format, args...)
      fmt.Fprintln(os.Stderr)
  }
  linenum, name := 12, "count"
  errorf(linenum, "undefined: %s", name) // "Line 12: undefined: count"
```
The `interface{}` type means that this function can accept any values at all for its final arguments, as we’ll explain in Chapter 7.

#### Exercises
- **Exercise 5.15**: Write variadic functions `max` and `min`, analogous to sum. What should these functions do when called with no arguments? Write variants that require at least one argument.
- **Exercise 5.16**: Write a variadic version of `strings.Join`.
- **Exercise 5.17**: Write a variadic function `ElementsByTagName` that, given an HTML node tree and zero or more names, returns all the elements that match one of those names. Here are two example calls:
```go
  func ElementsByTagName(doc *html.Node, name ...string) []*html.Node

  images := ElementsByTagName(doc, "img")
  headings := ElementsByTagName(doc, "h1", "h2", "h3", "h4")
```
