## 6.2. Methods with a Pointer Receiver 

Because calling a function makes a copy of each argument value, if a function needs to update a variable, or if an argument is so large that we wish to avoid copying it, we must pass the address of the variable using a pointer. The same goes for methods that need to update the receiver variable: we attach them to the pointer type, such as `*Point`.

```go
  func (p *Point) ScaleBy(factor float64) {
      p.X *= factor
      p.Y *= factor
  }
```
The name of this method is `(*Point).ScaleBy`. The parentheses are necessary; without them, the expression would be parsed as `*(Point.ScaleBy)`.

In a realistic program, convention dictates that if any method of Point has a pointer receiver, then all methods of Point should have a pointer receiver, even ones that don't strictly need it. We've broken this rule for `Point` so that we can show both kinds of method.

Named types (`Point`) and pointers to them (`*Point`) are the only types that may appear in a receiver declaration. Furthermore, to avoid ambiguities, method declarations are not permitted on named types that are themselves pointer types:
```go
  type P *int
  func (P) f() { /* ... */ } // compile error: invalid receiver type
```
The `(*Point).ScaleBy` method can be called by providing a `*Point` receiver, like this:
```go
  r := &Point{1, 2}
  r.ScaleBy(2)
  fmt.Println(*r) // "{2, 4}"
```
or this:
```go
  p := Point{1, 2}
  pptr := &p
  pptr.ScaleBy(2)
  fmt.Println(p) // "{2, 4}"
```
or this:
```go
  p := Point{1, 2}
  (&p).ScaleBy(2)
  fmt.Println(p) // "{2, 4}"
```
But the last two cases are ungainly. Fortunately, the language helps us here. If the receiver `p` is a *variable* of type `Point` but the method requires a `*Point` receiver, we can use this shorthand:
```go
  p.ScaleBy(2)
```
and the compiler will perform an implicit `&p` on the variable. This works only for variables, including struct fields like `p.X` and array or slice elements like `perim[0]`. We cannot call a `*Point` method on a non-addressable `Point` receiver, because there's no way to obtain the address of a temporary value.
```go
  Point{1, 2}.ScaleBy(2) // compile error: can't take address of Point literal
```
But we can call a `Point` method like `Point.Distance` with a `*Point` receiver, because there is a way to obtain the value from the address: just load the value pointed to by the receiver. The compiler inserts an implicit `*` operation for us. These two function calls are equivalent:
```go
  pptr.Distance(q)
  (*pptr).Distance(q)
```
Let's summarize these three cases again, since they are a frequent point of confusion. In every valid method call expression, exactly one of these three statements is true.

Either the receiver argument has the same type as the receiver parameter, for example both have type `T` or both have type `*T`:
```go
  Point{1, 2}.Distance(q) //  Point
  pptr.ScaleBy(2)         // *Point
```
Or the receiver argument is a variable of type `T` and the receiver parameter has type `*T`. The compiler implicitly takes the address of the variable:
```go
  p.ScaleBy(2) // implicit (&p)
```
Or the receiver argument has type `*T` and the receiver parameter has type `T`. The compiler implicitly dereferences the receiver, in other words, loads the value:
```go
  pptr.Distance(q) // implicit (*pptr)
```
If all the methods of a named type `T` have a receiver type of `T` itself (not `*T`), it is safe to copy instances of that type; calling any of its methods necessarily makes a copy. For example, `time.Duration` values are liberally copied, including as arguments to functions. But if any method has a pointer receiver, you should avoid copying instances of `T` because doing so may violate internal invariants. For example, copying an instance of `bytes.Buffer` would cause the original and the copy to alias (ยง2.3.2) the same underlying array of bytes. Subsequent method calls would have unpredictable effects.

### 6.2.1 Nil Is a Valid Receiver Value

Just as some functions allow nil pointers as arguments, so do some methods for their receiver, especially if `nil` is a meaningful zero value of the type, as with maps and slices. In this simple linked list of integers, `nil` represents the empty list:
```go
  // An IntList is a linked list of integers.
  // A nil *IntList represents the empty list.
  type IntList struct {
      Value int
      Tail  *IntList
  }
  
  // Sum returns the sum of the list elements.
  func (list *IntList) Sum() int {
      if list == nil {
          return 0
      }
      return list.Value + list.Tail.Sum()
  }
```
When you define a type whose methods allow nil as a receiver value, it's worth pointing this
out explicitly in its documentation comment, as we did above.

Here's part of the definition of the `Values` type from the `net/url` package:
```go
  // net/url
  package url

  // Values maps a string key to a list of values.
  type Values map[string][]string

  // Get returns the first value associated with the given key,
  // or "" if there are none.
  func (v Values) Get(key string) string {
      if vs := v[key]; len(vs) > 0 {
          return vs[0]
      }
      return ""
  }

  // Add adds the value to key.
  // It appends to any existing values associated with key.
  func (v Values) Add(key, value string) {
      v[key] = append(v[key], value)
  }
```
It exposes its representation as a map but also provides methods to simplify access to the map, whose values are slices of strings; it's a *multimap*. Its clients can use its intrinsic operators (`make`, slice literals, `m[key]`, and so on), or its methods, or both, as they prefer:
```go
// gopl.io/ch6/urlvalues

```
In the final call to `Get`, the nil receiver behaves like an empty map. We could equivalently have written it as `Values(nil).Get("item"))`, but `nil.Get("item")` will not compile because the type of `nil` has not been determined. By contrast, the final call to `Add` panics as it tries to update a nil map.

Because `url.Values` is a map type and a map refers to its key/value pairs indirectly, any updates and deletions that `url.Values.Add` makes to the map elements are visible to the caller. However, as with ordinary functions, any changes a method makes to the reference itself, like setting it to n il or making it refer to a different map data structure, will not be reflected in the caller.
