## 6.3. Composing Types by Struct Embedding 

Consider the type `ColoredPoint`:
```go
// gopl.io/ch6/coloredpoint
import "image/color"

type Point struct{ X, Y float64 }

type ColoredPoint struct {
	Point
	Color color.RGBA
}
```

We could have defined `ColoredPoint` as a struct of three fields, but instead we *embedded* a `Point` to provide the `X` and `Y` fields. As we saw in Section 4.4.3, embedding lets us take a syntactic shortcut to defining a `ColoredPoint` that contains all the fields of `Point`, plus some more. If we want, we can select the fields of `ColoredPoint` that were contributed by the embedded `Point` without mentioning `Point`:
```go
  var cp ColoredPoint
  cp.X = 1
  fmt.Println(cp.Point.X) // "1"
  cp.Point.Y = 2
  fmt.Println(cp.Y) // "2"
```

A similar mechanism applies to the *methods* of `Point`. We can call methods of the embedded `Point` field using a receiver of type `ColoredPoint`, even though `ColoredPoint` has no declared methods:
```go
	red := color.RGBA{255, 0, 0, 255}
	blue := color.RGBA{0, 0, 255, 255}
	var p = ColoredPoint{Point{1, 1}, red}
	var q = ColoredPoint{Point{5, 4}, blue}
	fmt.Println(p.Distance(q.Point)) // "5"
	p.ScaleBy(2)
	q.ScaleBy(2)
	fmt.Println(p.Distance(q.Point)) // "10"
```
The methods of Point have been *promoted* to ColoredPoint. In this way, embedding allows complex types with many methods to be built up by the *composition* of several fields, each providing a few methods.

Readers familiar with class-based object-oriented languages may be tempted to view `Point` as a base class and `ColoredPoint` as a subclass or derived class, or to interpret the relationship between these types as if a `ColoredPoint` *"is a"* `Point`. But that would be a mistake. Notice the calls to `Distance` above. `Distance` has a parameter of type `Point`, and `q` is not a `Point`, so although `q` does have an embedded field of that type, we must explicitly select it. Attempting to pass `q` would be an error:
```go
  p.Distance(q) // compile error: cannot use q (ColoredPoint) as Point
```
A `ColoredPoint` is not a `Point`, but it *"has a"* `Point`, and it has two additional methods `Distance` and `ScaleBy` promoted from `Point`. If you prefer to think in terms of implementation, the embedded field instructs the compiler to generate additional wrapper methods that delegate to the declared methods, equivalent to these:
```go
  func (p ColoredPoint) Distance(q Point) float64 {
      return p.Point.Distance(q)
  }

  func (p *ColoredPoint) ScaleBy(factor float64) {
      p.Point.ScaleBy(factor)
  }
```
When `Point.Distance` is called by the first of these wrapper methods, its receiver value is `p.Point`, not `p`, and there is no way for the method to access the `ColoredPoint` in which the `Point` is embedded.

The type of an anonymous field may be a *pointer* to a named type, in which case fields and methods are promoted indirectly from the pointed-to object. Adding another level of indirection lets us share common structures and vary the relationships between objects dynamically. The declaration of `ColoredPoint` below embeds a `*Point`:
```go
	type ColoredPoint struct {
		*Point
		Color color.RGBA
	}

	p := ColoredPoint{&Point{1, 1}, red}
	q := ColoredPoint{&Point{5, 4}, blue}
	fmt.Println(p.Distance(*q.Point)) // "5"
	q.Point = p.Point                 // p and q now share the same Point
	p.ScaleBy(2)
	fmt.Println(*p.Point, *q.Point) // "{2 2} {2 2}"
```
A struct type may have more than one anonymous field. Had we declared `ColoredPoint` as
```go
	type ColoredPoint struct {
		Point
		Color color.RGBA
	}
```
then a value of this type would have all the methods of Point, all the methods of RGBA, and any additional methods declared on `ColoredPoint` directly. When the compiler resolves a selector such as `p.ScaleBy` to a method, it first looks for a directly declared method named `ScaleBy`, then for methods promoted once from `ColoredPoint`'s embedded fields, then for methods promoted twice from embedded fields within `Point` and `RGBA`, and so on. The compiler reports an error if the selector was ambiguous because two methods were promoted from the same rank.

Methods can be declared only on named types (like `Point`) and pointers to them (`*Point`), but thanks to embedding, it's possible and sometimes useful for unnamed struct types to have methods too.

Here's a nice trick to illustrate. This example shows part of a simple cache implemented using two package-level variables, a mutex (ยง9.2) and the map that it guards:
```go
  var (
      mu sync.Mutex // guards mapping
      mapping = make(map[string]string)
  )

  func Lookup(key string) string {
      mu.Lock()
      v := mapping[key]
      mu.Unlock()
      return v
  }
```
The version below is functionally equivalent but groups together the two related variables in a single package-level variable, `cache`:
```go
  var cache = struct {
      sync.Mutex
      mapping map[string]string 
  } {
      mapping: make(map[string]string),
  }

  func Lookup(key string) string {
      cache.Lock()
      v := cache.mapping[key]
      cache.Unlock()
      return v
  }
```
The new variable gives more expressive names to the variables related to the cache, and because the `sync.Mutex` field is embedded within it, its `Lock` and `Unlock` methods are promoted to the unnamed struct type, allowing us to lock the `cache` with a self-explanatory syntax.
