## 6.5. Example: Bit Vector Type 

Sets in Go are usually implemented as a `map[T]bool`, where `T` is the element type. A set represented by a map is very flexible but, for certain problems, a specialized representation may outperform it. For example, in domains such as dataflow analysis where set elements are small non-negative integers, sets have many elements, and set operations like union and intersection are common, a *bit vector* is ideal.

A bit vector uses a slice of unsigned integer values or "words", each bit of which represents a possible element of the set. The set contains *i* if the *i*-th bit is set. The following program demonstrates a simple bit vector type with three methods:
```go
// gopl.io/ch6/intset
// Package intset provides a set of integers based on a bit vector.

// An IntSet is a set of small non-negative integers.
// Its zero value represents the empty set.
type IntSet struct {
	words []uint64
}

// Has reports whether the set contains the non-negative value x.
func (s *IntSet) Has(x int) bool {
	word, bit := x/64, uint(x%64)
	return word < len(s.words) && s.words[word]&(1<<bit) != 0
}

// Add adds the non-negative value x to the set.
func (s *IntSet) Add(x int) {
	word, bit := x/64, uint(x%64)
	for word >= len(s.words) {
		s.words = append(s.words, 0)
	}
	s.words[word] |= 1 << bit
}

// UnionWith sets s to the union of s and t.
func (s *IntSet) UnionWith(t *IntSet) {
	for i, tword := range t.words {
		if i < len(s.words) {
			s.words[i] |= tword
		} else {
			s.words = append(s.words, tword)
		}
	}
}
```
Since each word has 64 bits, to locate the bit for x, we use the quotient x/64 as the word index and the remainder x%64 as the bit index within that word. The UnionWith operation uses the bitwise OR operator | to compute the union 64 elements at a time. (We’ll revisit the choice of 64-bit words in Exercise 6.5.)

This implementation lacks many desirable features, some of which are posed as exercises below, but one is hard to live without: way to print an IntSet as a string. Let’s give it a String method as we did with Celsius in Section 2.5:
```go
// String returns the set as a string of the form "{1 2 3}".
func (s *IntSet) String() string {
	var buf bytes.Buffer
	buf.WriteByte('{')
	for i, word := range s.words {
		if word == 0 {
			continue
		}
		for j := 0; j < 64; j++ {
			if word&(1<<uint(j)) != 0 {
				if buf.Len() > len("{") {
					buf.WriteByte(' ')
				}
				fmt.Fprintf(&buf, "%d", 64*i+j)
			}
		}
	}
	buf.WriteByte('}')
	return buf.String()
}
```

Notice the similarity of the String method above with intsToString in Section 3.5.4; bytes.BufferisoftenusedthiswayinStringmethods. Thefmtpackagetreatstypeswitha String method specially so that values of complicated types can display themselves in a user- friendly manner. Instead of printing the raw representation of the value (a struct in this case), fmt calls the String method. The mechanism relies on interfaces and type assertions, which we’ll explain in Chapter 7.

We can now demonstrate IntSet in action:
```go
  var x, y IntSet
  x.Add(1)
  x.Add(144)
  x.Add(9)
  fmt.Println(x.String()) // "{1 9 144}"

  y.Add(9)
  y.Add(42)
  fmt.Println(y.String()) // "{9 42}"

  x.UnionWith(&y)
  fmt.Println(x.String()) // "{1 9 42 144}"

  fmt.Println(x.Has(9), x.Has(123)) // "true false"
```
A word of caution: we declared String and Has as methods of the pointer type *IntSet not out of necessity, but for consistency with the other two methods, which need a pointer receiver because they assign to s.words. Consequently, an IntSet value does not have a String method, occasionally leading to surprises like this:
```go
  fmt.Println(&x)         // "{1 9 42 144}"
  fmt.Println(x.String()) // "{1 9 42 144}"
  fmt.Println(x)          // "{[4398046511618 0 65536]}"
```
In the first case, we print an `*IntSet` pointer, which does have a `String` method. In the second case, we call `String()` on an `IntSet` variable; the compiler inserts the implicit & operation, giving us a pointer, which has the `String` method. But in the third case, because the `IntSet` value does not have a `String` method, `fmt.Println` prints the representation of the struct instead. It’s important not to forget the & operator. Making String a method of `IntSet`, not `*IntSet`, might be a good idea, but this is a case-by-case judgment.

### Exercises
- **Exercise 6.1**: Implement these additional methods:
```go
  func (*IntSet) Len() int      // return the number of elements
  func (*IntSet) Remove(x int)  // remove x from the set
  func (*IntSet) Clear()        // remove all elements from the set
  func (*IntSet) Copy() *IntSet // return a copy of the set
```
- **Exercise 6.2**: Define a variadic (*IntSet).AddAll(...int) method that allows a list of values to be added, such as `s.AddAll(1, 2, 3)`.
- **Exercise 6.3**: `(*IntSet).UnionWith` computes the union of two sets using |, the word-parallel bitwise OR operator. Implement methods for `IntersectWith`, `DifferenceWith`, and `SymmetricDifference` for the corresponding set operations. (The symmetric difference of two sets contains the elements present in one set or the other but not both.)
- **Exercise 6.4**: Add a method `Elems` that returns a slice containing the elements of the set, sui
able for iterating over with a `range` loop.
- **Exercise 6.5**: The type of each word used by `IntSet` is `uint64`, but 64-bit arithmetic may be inefficient on a 32-bit platform. Modify the program to use the uint type, which is the most efficient unsigned integer type for the platform. Instead of dividing by 64, define a constant holding the effective size of `uint` in bits, 32 or 64. You can use the perhaps too-clever expression `32 << (^uint(0) >> 63)` for this purpose.
