## 6.6. Encapsulation

A variable or method of an object is said to be encapsulated if it is inaccessible to clients of the object. *Encapsulation*, sometimes called information hiding, is a key aspect of object-oriented programming.

Go has only one mechanism to control the visibility of names: capitalized identifiers are exported from the package in which they are defined, and uncapitalized names are not. The same mechanism that limits access to members of a package also limits access to the fields of a struct or the methods of a type. As a consequence, to encapsulate an object, we must make it a struct.

That’s the reason the `IntSet` type from the previous section was declared as a struct type even though it has only a single field:
```go
  type IntSet struct {
      words []uint64
  }
```
We could instead define `IntSet` as a slice type as follows, though of course we’d have to replace each occurrence of `s.words` by `*s` in its methods:
```go
  type IntSet []uint64
```
Although this version of `IntSet` would be essentially equivalent, it would allow clients from other packages to read and modify the slice directly. Put another way, whereas the expression `*s` could be used in any package, `s.words` may appear only in the package that defines `IntSet`.

Another consequence of this name-based mechanism is that the unit of encapsulation is the package, not the type as in many other languages. The fields of a struct type are visible to all code within the same package. Whether the code appears in a function or a method makes no difference.

Encapsulation provides three benefits. First, because clients cannot directly modify the object's variables, one need inspect fewer statements to understand the possible values of those variables.

Second, hiding implementation details prevents clients from depending on things that might change, which gives the designer greater freedom to evolve the implementation without breaking API compatibility.

As an example, consider the `bytes.Buffer` type. It is frequently used to accumulate very short strings, so it is a profitable optimization to reserve a little extra space in the object to avoid memory allocation in this common case. Since `Buffer` is a struct type, this space takes the form of an extra field of type `[64]byte` with an uncapitalized name. When this field was added, because it was not exported, clients of `Buffer` outside the `bytes` package were unaware of any change except improved performance. `Buffer` and its `Grow` method are shown below, simplified for clarity:
```go
  type Buffer struct {
      buf     []byte
      initial [64]byte
      /* ... */
  }

  // Grow expands the buffer's capacity, if necessary,
  // to guarantee space for another n bytes. [...]
  func (b *Buffer) Grow(n int) {
      if b.buf == nil {
          b.buf = b.initial[:0] // use preallocated space initially
      }
      if len(b.buf)+n > cap(b.buf) {
          buf := make([]byte, b.Len(), 2*cap(b.buf) + n)
          copy(buf, b.buf)
          b.buf = buf
      } 
  }
```
The third benefit of encapsulation, and in many cases the most important, is that it prevents clients from setting an object’s variables arbitrarily. Because the object's variables can be set only by functions in the same package, the author of that package can ensure that all those functions maintain the object’s internal invariants. For example, the `Counter` type below permits clients to increment the counter or to reset it to zero, but not to set it to some arbitrary value:
```go
  type Counter struct { n int }

  func (c *Counter) N() int     { return c.n }
  func (c *Counter) Increment() { c.n++ }
  func (c *Counter) Reset()     { c.n = 0 }
```
Functions that merely access or modify internal values of a type, such as the methods of the `Logger` type from `log` package, below, are called *getters* and *setters*. However, when naming a getter method, we usually omit the `Get` prefix. This preference for brevity extends to all methods, not just field accessors, and to other redundant prefixes as well, such as `Fetch`, `Find`, and `Lookup`.
```go
  package log

  type Logger struct {
      flags  int
      prefix string
      // ...
  }

  func (l *Logger) Flags() int
  func (l *Logger) SetFlags(flag int)
  func (l *Logger) Prefix() string
  func (l *Logger) SetPrefix(prefix string)
```
Go style does not forbid exported fields. Of course, once exported, a field cannot be unexported without an incompatible change to the API, so the initial choice should be deliberate and should consider the complexity of the invariants that must be maintained, the likelihood of future changes, and the quantity of client code that would be affected by a change.

Encapsulation is not always desirable. By revealing its representation as an int64 number of nanoseconds, time.Duration lets us use all the usual arithmetic and comparison operations with durations, and even to define constants of this type:
```go
  const day = 24 * time.Hour
  fmt.Println(day.Seconds()) // "86400"
```
As another example, contrast `IntSet` with the `geometry.Path` type from the beginning of this chapter. `Path` was defined as a slice type, allowing its clients to construct instances using the slice literal syntax, to iterate over its points using a `range` loop, and so on, whereas these operations are denied to clients of `IntSet`.

Here’s the crucial difference: `geometry.Path` is intrinsically a sequence of points, no more and no less, and we don’t foresee adding new fields to it, so it makes sense for the `geometry` package to reveal that `Path` is a slice. In contrast, an `IntSet` merely happens to be represented as a `[]uint64` slice. It could have been represented using `[]uint`, or something completely different for sets that are sparse or very small, and it might perhaps benefit from additional features like an extra field to record the number of elements in the set. For these reasons, it makes sense for `IntSet` to be opaque.

In this chapter, we learned how to associate methods with named types, and how to call those methods. Although methods are crucial to object-oriented programming, they’re only half the picture. To complete it, we need *interfaces*, the subject of the next chapter.
