## 3.6. Constants

Constants are expressions whose value is known to the compiler and whose evaluation is guaranteed to occur at compile time, not at run time. The underlying type of every constant is a basic type: boolean, string, or number.

A const declaration defines named values that look syntactically like variables but whose value is constant, which prevents accidental (or nefarious) changes during program execution. For instance, a constant is more appropriate than a variable for a mathematical constant like pi, since its value won't change:
```go
  const pi = 3.14159 // approximately; math.Pi is a better approximation
```
As with variables, a sequence of constants can appear in one declaration; this would be appropriate for a group of related values:
```go
  const (
      e  = 2.71828182845904523536028747135266249775724709369995957496696763
      pi = 3.14159265358979323846264338327950288419716939937510582097494459
  )
```

Many computations on constants can be completely evaluated at compile time, reducing the work necessary at run time and enabling other compiler optimizations. Errors ordinarily detected at run time can be reported at compile time when their operands are constants, such as integer division by zero, string indexing out of bounds, and any floating-point operation that would result in a non-finite value.

The results of all arithmetic, logical, and comparison operations applied to constant operands are themselves constants, as are the results of conversions and calls to certain built-in functions such as `len`, `cap`, `real`, `imag`, `complex`, and `unsafe.Sizeof` (ยง13.1).

Since their values are known to the compiler, constant expressions may appear in types, specifically as the length of an array type:
```go
  const IPv4Len = 4

  // parseIPv4 parses an IPv4 address (d.d.d.d).
  func parseIPv4(s string) IP {
      var p [IPv4Len]byte
      // ...
  }
```

A constant declaration may specify a type as well as a value, but in the absence of an explicit type, the type is inferred from the expression on the right-hand side. In the following, `time.Duration` is a named type whose underlying type is `int64`, and `time.Minute` is a constant of that type. Both of the constants declared below thus have the type `time.Duration` as well, as revealed by `%T`:

```go
  const noDelay time.Duration = 0
  const timeout = 5 * time.Minute
  fmt.Printf("%T %[1]v\n", noDelay)     // "time.Duration 0"
  fmt.Printf("%T %[1]v\n", timeout)     // "time.Duration 5m0s
  fmt.Printf("%T %[1]v\n", time.Minute) // "time.Duration 1m0s"
```

When a sequence of constants is declared as a group, the right-hand side expression may be omitted for all but the first of the group, implying that the previous expression and its type should be used again. For example:
```go
  const ( 
      a = 1
      b 
      c = 2
      d
  )

  fmt.Println(a, b, c, d) // "1 1 2 2"
```

This is not very useful if the implicitly copied right-hand side expression always evaluates to the same thing. But what if it could vary? This brings us to `iota`.


### 3.6.1 The Constant Generator `iota`

A const declaration may use the *constant generator* `iota`, which is used to create a sequence of related values without spelling out each one explicitly. In a `const` declaration, the value of iota begins at zero and increments by one for each item in the sequence.

Here's an example from the `time` package, which defines named constants of type `Weekday` for the days of the week, starting with zero for `Sunday`. Types of this kind are often called *enumerations*, or *enums* for short.
```go
  type Weekday int
  const (
      Sunday Weekday = iota
      Monday
      Tuesday
      Wednesday
      Thursday
      Friday
      Saturday
)
```
This declares `Sunday` to be 0, `Monday` to be 1, and so on.

We can use `iota` in more complex expressions too, as in this example from the `net` package where each of the lowest 5 bits of an unsigned integer is given a distinct name and boolean interpretation:
```go
  type Flags uint
  const (
      FlagUp Flags = 1 << iota // is up
      FlagBroadcast            // supports broadcast access capability
      FlagLoopback             // is a loopback interface
      FlagPointToPoint         // belongs to a point-to-point link
      FlagMulticast            // supports multicast access capability
  )
```

As `iota` increments, each constant is assigned the value of `1 << iota`, which evaluates to successive powers of two, each corresponding to a single bit. We can use these constants within functions that test, set, or clear one or more of these bits:
```go
// gopl.io/ch3/netflag
// Netflag demonstrates an integer type used as a bit field.
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	_ "net"
)

//!+
func IsUp(v Flags) bool     { return v&FlagUp == FlagUp }
func TurnDown(v *Flags)     { *v &^= FlagUp }
func SetBroadcast(v *Flags) { *v |= FlagBroadcast }
func IsCast(v Flags) bool   { return v&(FlagBroadcast|FlagMulticast) != 0 }

func main() {
	var v Flags = FlagMulticast | FlagUp
	fmt.Printf("%b %t\n", v, IsUp(v)) // "10001 true"
	TurnDown(&v)
	fmt.Printf("%b %t\n", v, IsUp(v)) // "10000 false"
	SetBroadcast(&v)
	fmt.Printf("%b %t\n", v, IsUp(v))   // "10010 false"
	fmt.Printf("%b %t\n", v, IsCast(v)) // "10010 true"
}
```

As a more complex example of `iota`, this declaration names the powers of 1024:
```go
  const (
      _ = 1 << (10 * iota)
      KiB // 1024
      MiB // 1048576
      GiB // 1073741824
      TiB // 1099511627776             (exceeds 1 << 32)
      PiB // 1125899906842624
      EiB // 1152921504606846976
      ZiB // 1180591620717411303424    (exceeds 1 << 64)
      YiB // 1208925819614629174706176
  )
```

The `iota` mechanism has its limits. For example, it's not possible to generate the more familiar powers of 1000 (KB, MB, and so on) because there is no exponentiation operator.

#### Exercises
- **Exercise 3.13**: Write `const` declarations for KB, MB, up through YB as compactly as you can.


### 3.6.2 Untyped Constants

Constants in Go are a bit unusual. Although a constant can have any of the basic data types like `int` or `float64`, including named basic types like `time.Duration`, many constants are not committed to a particular type. The compiler represents these uncommitted constants with much greater numeric precision than values of basic types, and arithmetic on them is more precise than machine arithmetic; you may assume at least 256 bits of precision. There are six flavors of these uncommitted *untyped* constants:
- untyped boolean
- untyped integer
- untyped rune
- untyped floating-point
- untyped complex
- untyped string

By deferring this commitment, untyped constants not only retain their higher precision until later, but they can participate in many more expressions than committed constants without requiring conversions. For example, the values ZiB and YiB in the example above are too big to store in any integer variable, but they are legitimate constants that may be used in expressions like this one:
```go
  fmt.Println(YiB/ZiB) // "1024"
```
As another example, the floating-point constant `math.Pi` may be used wherever any floating-point or complex value is needed:
```go
  var x float32 = math.Pi
  var y float64 = math.Pi
  var z complex128 = math.Pi
```
If `math.Pi` had been committed to a specific type such as `float64`, the result would not be as precise, and type conversions would be required to use it when a `float32` or `complex128` value is wanted:
```go
  const Pi64 float64 = math.Pi

  var x float32 = float32(Pi64)
  var y float64 = Pi64
  var z complex128 = complex128(Pi64)
```

For literals, syntax determines flavor. The literals `0`, `0.0`, `0i`, and `'\u0000'` all denote constants of the same value but different flavors: untyped integer, untyped floating-point, untyped complex, and untyped rune, respectively. Similarly, `true` and `false` are untyped booleans and string literals are untyped strings.

Recall that `/` may represent integer or floating-point division depending on its operands. Consequently, the choice of literal may affect the result of a constant division expression:
```go
  var f float64 = 212
  fmt.Println((f - 32) * 5 / 9)     // "100"; (f - 32) * 5 is a float64
  fmt.Println(5 / 9 * (f - 32))     // "0";   5/9 is an untyped integer, 0
  fmt.Println(5.0 / 9.0 * (f - 32)) // "100"; 5.0/9.0 is an untyped float
```

Only constants can be untyped. When an untyped constant is assigned to a variable, as in the first statement below, or appears on the right-hand side of a variable declaration with an explicit type, as in the other three statements, the constant is implicitly converted to the type of that variable if possible.
```go
  var f float64 = 3 + 0i // untyped complex -> float64
  f = 2                  // untyped integer -> float64
  f = 1e123              // untyped floating-point -> float64
  f = 'a'                // untyped rune -> float64
```
The statements above are thus equivalent to these:
```go
  var f float64 = float64(3 + 0i)
  f = float64(2)
  f = float64(1e123)
  f = float64('a')
```

Whether implicit or explicit, converting a constant from one type to another requires that the target type can represent the original value. Rounding is allowed for real and complex floating-point numbers:
```go
  const (
      deadbeef = 0xdeadbeef // untyped int with value 3735928559
      a = uint32(deadbeef)  // uint32 with value 3735928559
      b = float32(deadbeef) // float32 with value 3735928576 (rounded up)
      c = float64(deadbeef) // float64 with value 3735928559 (exact)
      d = int32(deadbeef)   // compile error: constant overflows int32
      e = float64(1e309)    // compile error: constant overflows float64
      f = uint(-1)          // compile error: constant underflows uint
  )
```

In a variable declaration without an explicit type (including short variable declarations), the flavor of the untyped constant implicitly determines the default type of the variable, as in these examples:
```go
  i := 0      // untyped integer;        implicit int(0)
  r := '\000' // untyped rune;           implicit rune('\000')
  f := 0.0    // untyped floating-point; implicit float64(0.0)
  c := 0i     // untyped complex;        implicit complex128(0i)
```

Note the asymmetry: untyped integers are converted to `int`, whose size is not guaranteed, but untyped floating-point and complex numbers are converted to the explicitly sized types `float64` and `complex128`. The language has no unsized `float` and `complex` types analogous to unsized `int`, because it is very difficult to write correct numerical algorithms without knowing the size of one's floating-point data types.

To give the variable a different type, we must explicitly convert the untyped constant to the desired type or state the desired type in the variable declaration, as in these examples:
```go
  var i = int8(0)
  var i int8 = 0
```
These defaults are particularly important when converting an untyped constant to an interface value (see Chapter 7) since they determine its dynamic type.
```go
  fmt.Printf("%T\n", 0)      // "int"
  fmt.Printf("%T\n", 0.0)    // "float64"
  fmt.Printf("%T\n", 0i)     // "complex128"
  fmt.Printf("%T\n", '\000') // "int32" (rune)
```


We've now covered the basic data types of Go. The next step is to show how they can be combined into larger groupings like arrays and structs, and then into data structures for solving real programming problems; that is the topic of Chapter 4.

