## 1.3. Finding Duplicate Lines

Programs for file copying, printing, searching, sorting, counting, and the like all have a similar structure: 
- a loop over the input
- some computation on each element
- generation of output on the fly or at the end

We'll show three variants of a program called `dup`; it is partly inspired by the Unix `uniq` command, which looks for adjacent duplicate lines. The structures and packages used are models that can be easily adapted.
The first version of `dup` prints each line that appears more than once in the standard input, preceded by its count. This program introduces the if statement, the map data type, and the bufio package.
```go
// gopl.io/ch1/dup1
package main

import (
	"bufio"
	"fmt"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	counts := make(map[string]int)
	input := bufio.NewScanner(os.Stdin)
	for input.Scan() {
		counts[input.Text()]++
	}
	// NOTE: ignoring potential errors from input.Err()
	for line, n := range counts {
		if n > 1 {
			fmt.Printf("%d\t%s\n", n, line)
		}
	}
}
```
As with `for`, parentheses are never used around the condition in an `if` statement, but braces are required for the body. There can be an optional `else` part that is executed if the condition is false.

A *map* holds a set of key/value pairs and provides constant-time operations to store, retrieve, or test for an item in the set. The key may be of any type whose values can compared with `==`, strings being the most common example; the value may be of any type at all. In this example, the keys are `string`s and the values are `int`s. The built-in function make creates a new empty map; it has other uses too. Maps are discussed at length in Section 4.3.  
Each time `dup` reads a line of input, the line is used as a key into the map and the corresponding value is incremented. The statement `counts[input.Text()]++` is equivalent to these two statements:  
```go
  line := input.Text()
  counts[line] = counts[line] + 1
```
It's not a problem if the map doesn't yet contain that key. The first time a new line is seen, the expression `counts[line]` on the right-hand side evaluates to the zero value for its type, which is `0` for `int`.  

To print the results, we use another `range`-based `for` loop, this time over the `counts` map. As before, each iteration produces two results, a key and the value of the map element for that key. The order of map iteration is not specified, but in practice it is random, varying from one run to another. This design is intentional, since it prevents programs from relying on any particular ordering where none is guaranteed.  

Onward to the `bufio` package, which helps make input and output efficient and convenient. One of its most useful features is a type called `Scanner` that reads input and breaks it into lines or words; it's often the easiest way to process input that comes naturally in lines.  

The program uses a short variable declaration to create a new variable input that refers to a `bufio.Scanner`:  
```go
  input := bufio.NewScanner(os.Stdin)
```
The scanner reads from the program's standard input. Each call to `input.Scan()` reads the next line and removes the newline character from the end; the result can be retrieved by calling `input.Text()`. The `Scan` function returns `true` if there is a line and `false` when there is no more input.
The function `fmt.Printf`, like `printf` in C and other languages, produces formatted output from a list of expressions. Its first argument is a format string that specifies how subsequent arguments should be formatted. The format of each argument is determined by a conversion character, a letter following a percent sign. For example, `%d` formats an integer operand using decimal notation, and `%s` expands to the value of a string operand.
`Printf` has over a dozen such conversions, which Go programmers call *verbs*. This table is far from a complete specification but illustrates many of the features that are available:

|       verb       |                             description                              |
| ---------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `%d`             | decimal integer                                                      |
| `%x,` `%o,` `%b` | integer in hexadecimal, octal, binary                                |
| `%f`, `%g`, `%e` | floating-point number: `3.141593` `3.141592653589793` `3.141593e+00` |
| `%t`             | boolean: `true` or `false`                                           |
| `%c`             | rune (Unicode code point)                                            |
| `%s`             | string                                                               |
| `%q`             | quoted string `"abc"` or rune `'c'`                                  |
| `%v`             | any value in a natural format                                        |
| `%T`             | type of any value                                                    |
| `%%`             | literal percent sign (no operand)                                    |

The format string in `dup1` also contains a tab `\t` and a newline `\n`. String literals may contain such *escape sequences* for representing otherwise invisible characters. `Printf` does not write a newline by default. By convention, formatting functions whose names end in `f`, such as `log.Printf` and `fmt.Errorf`, use the formatting rules of `fmt.Printf`, whereas those whose names end in ln follow `Println`, formatting their arguments as if by `%v`, followed by a newline.

Many programs read either from their standard input, as above, or from a sequence of named files. The next version of `dup` can read from the standard input or handle a list of file names, using `os.Open` to open each one:
```go
// gopl.io/ch1/dup2
package main

import (
	"bufio"
	"fmt"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	counts := make(map[string]int)
	files := os.Args[1:]
	if len(files) == 0 {
		countLines(os.Stdin, counts)
	} else {
		for _, arg := range files {
			f, err := os.Open(arg)
			if err != nil {
				fmt.Fprintf(os.Stderr, "dup2: %v\n", err)
				continue
			}
			countLines(f, counts)
			f.Close()
		}
	}
	for line, n := range counts {
		if n > 1 {
			fmt.Printf("%d\t%s\n", n, line)
		}
	}
}

func countLines(f *os.File, counts map[string]int) {
	input := bufio.NewScanner(f)
	for input.Scan() {
		counts[input.Text()]++
	}
	// NOTE: ignoring potential errors from input.Err()
}
```

The function `os.Open` returns two values. The first is an open file (`*os.File`) that is used in subsequent reads by the `Scanner`.  

The second result of `os.Open` is a value of the built-in `error` type. If `err` equals the special built-in value `nil`, the file was opened successfully. The file is read, and when the end of the input is reached, `Close` closes the file and releases any resources. On the other hand, if `err` is not `nil`, something went wrong. In that case, the error value describes the problem. Our simple-minded error handling prints a message on the standard error stream using `Fprintf` and the verb `%v`, which displays a value of any type in a default format, and `dup` then carries on with the next file; the `continue` statement goes to the next iteration of the enclosing `for` loop.  

In the interests of keeping code samples to a reasonable size, our early examples are intentionally somewhat cavalier about error handling. Clearly we must check for an error from `os.Open`; however, we are ignoring the less likely possibility that an error could occur while reading the file with `input.Scan`. We will note places where we've skipped error checking, and we will go into the details of error handling in Section 5.4.  

Notice that the call to `countLines` precedes its declaration. Functions and other package-level entities may be declared in any order.  

A map is a *reference* to the data structure created by make. When a map is passed to a function, the function receives a copy of the reference, so any changes the called function makes to the underlying data structure will be visible through the caller's map reference too. In our example, the values inserted into the `counts` map by `countLines` are seen by `main`.  

The versions of `dup` above operate in a "streaming" mode in which input is read and broken into lines as needed, so in principle these programs can handle an arbitrary amount of input. An alternative approach is to read the entire input into memory in one big gulp, split it into lines all at once, then process the lines. The following version, `dup3`, operates in that fashion. It introduces the function `ReadFile` (from the `io/ioutil` package), which reads the entire contents of a named file, and `strings.Split`, which splits a string into a slice of substrings. (`Split` is the opposite of `strings.Join`, which we saw earlier.)  

We've simplified `dup3` somewhat. First, it only reads named files, not the standard input, since `ReadFile` requires a file name argument. Second, we moved the counting of the lines back into `main`, since it is now needed in only one place.  
```go
// gopl.io/ch1/dup3
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"io/ioutil"
	"os"
	"strings"
)

func main() {
	counts := make(map[string]int)
	for _, filename := range os.Args[1:] {
		data, err := ioutil.ReadFile(filename)
		if err != nil {
			fmt.Fprintf(os.Stderr, "dup3: %v\n", err)
			continue
		}
		for _, line := range strings.Split(string(data), "\n") {
			counts[line]++
		}
	}
	for line, n := range counts {
		if n > 1 {
			fmt.Printf("%d\t%s\n", n, line)
		}
	}
}
```

`ReadFile` returns a byte slice that must be converted into a `string` so it can be split by `strings.Split`. We will discuss strings and byte slices at length in Section 3.5.4.  

Under the covers, `bufio.Scanner`, `ioutil.ReadFile`, and `ioutil.WriteFile` use the `Read` and `Write` methods of `*os.File`, but it's rare that most programmers need to access those lower-level routines directly. The higher-level functions like those from `bufio` and `io/ioutil` are easier to use.

#### Exercises
- **Exercise 1.4**: Modify dup2 to print the names of all files in which each duplicated line occurs.
