## 1.5. Fetching a URL

For many applications, access to information from the Internet is as important as access to the local file system. Go provides a collection of packages, grouped under net, that make it easy to send and receive information through the Internet, make low-level network connections, and set up servers, for which Go's concurrency features (introduced in Chapter 8) are particularly useful.  

To illustrate the minimum necessary to retrieve information over HTTP, here's a simple program called fetch that fetches the content of each specified URL and prints it as uninterpreted text; it's inspired by the invaluable utility curl. Obviously one would usually do more with such data, but this shows the basic idea. We will use this program frequently in the book.  
```go
// gopl.io/ch1/fetch
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"io/ioutil"
	"net/http"
	"os"
)

func main() {
	for _, url := range os.Args[1:] {
		resp, err := http.Get(url)
		if err != nil {
			fmt.Fprintf(os.Stderr, "fetch: %v\n", err)
			os.Exit(1)
		}
		b, err := ioutil.ReadAll(resp.Body)
		resp.Body.Close()
		if err != nil {
			fmt.Fprintf(os.Stderr, "fetch: reading %s: %v\n", url, err)
			os.Exit(1)
		}
		fmt.Printf("%s", b)
	}
}
```

This program introduces functions from two packages, `net/http` and `io/ioutil`. The `http.Get` function makes an HTTP request and, if there is no error, returns the result in the response struct `resp`. The `Body` field of `resp` contains the server response as a readable stream. Next, `ioutil.ReadAll` reads the entire response; the result is stored in `b`. The `Body` stream is closed to avoid leaking resources, and `Printf` writes the response to the standard output.
```
  $ go build gopl.io/ch1/fetch
  $ ./fetch http://gopl.io
  <html>
  <head>
  <title>The Go Programming Language</title>
  ...
```

If the HTTP request fails, `fetch` reports the failure instead:
```
  $ ./fetch http://bad.gopl.io
  fetch: Get http://bad.gopl.io: dial tcp: lookup bad.gopl.io: no such host
```

In either error case, `os.Exit(1)` causes the process to exit with a status code of 1.

#### Exercises
- **Exercise 1.7**: The function call `io.Copy(dst,src)` reads from `src` and writes to `dst`. Use it instead of `ioutil.ReadAll` to copy the response body to `os.Stdout` without requiring a buffer large enough to hold the entire stream. Be sure to check the error result of `io.Copy`.
- **Exercise 1.8**: Modify fetch to add the prefix http:// to each argument URL if it is missing. You might want to use strings.HasPrefix.
- **Exercise 1.9**: Modify fetch to also print the HTTP status code, found in resp.Status.
