## 1.7. A Web Server

Go's libraries makes it easy to write a web server that responds to client requests like those made by `fetch`. In this section, we'll show a minimal server that returns the path component of the URL used to access the server. That is, if the request is for `http://localhost:8000/hello`, the response will be `URL.Path = "/hello"`.
```go
// gopl.io/ch1/server1
// Server1 is a minimal "echo" server.
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"log"
	"net/http"
)

func main() {
	http.HandleFunc("/", handler) // each request calls handler
	log.Fatal(http.ListenAndServe("localhost:8000", nil))
}

// handler echoes the Path component of the requested URL.
func handler(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	fmt.Fprintf(w, "URL.Path = %q\n", r.URL.Path)
}
```

The program is only a handful of lines long because library functions do most of the work. The main function connects a handler function to incoming URLs that begin with `/`, which is all URLs, and starts a server listening for incoming requests on port 8000. A request is represented as a struct of type `http.Request`, which contains a number of related fields, one of which is the URL of the incoming request. When a request arrives, it is given to the handler function, which extracts the path component (`/hello`) from the request URL and sends it back as the response, using `fmt.Fprintf`. Web servers will be explained in detail in Section 7.7.  

Let's start the server in the background. On Mac OS X or Linux, add an ampersand (`&`) to the command; on Microsoft Windows, you will need to run the command without the ampersand in a separate command window.  
```
  $ go run src/gopl.io/ch1/server1/main.go &
```

We can then make client requests from the command line:
```
  $ go build gopl.io/ch1/fetch
  $ ./fetch http://localhost:8000
  URL.Path = "/"
  $ ./fetch http://localhost:8000/help
  URL.Path = "/help"
```

Alternatively, we can access the server from a web browser.

It's easy to add features to the server. One useful addition is a specific URL that returns a status of some sort. For example, this version does the same echo but also counts the number of requests; a request to the URL `/count` returns the count so far, excluding `/count` requests themselves:
```go
// gopl.io/ch1/server2
// Server2 is a minimal "echo" and counter server.
package main

import (
	"fmt"
	"log"
	"net/http"
	"sync"
)

var mu sync.Mutex
var count int

func main() {
	http.HandleFunc("/", handler)
	http.HandleFunc("/count", counter)
	log.Fatal(http.ListenAndServe("localhost:8000", nil))
}

// handler echoes the Path component of the requested URL.
func handler(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	mu.Lock()
	count++
	mu.Unlock()
	fmt.Fprintf(w, "URL.Path = %q\n", r.URL.Path)
}

// counter echoes the number of calls so far.
func counter(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	mu.Lock()
	fmt.Fprintf(w, "Count %d\n", count)
	mu.Unlock()
}
```

The server has two handlers, and the request URL determines which one is called: a request for `/count` invokes counter and all others invoke handler. A handler pattern that ends with a slash matches any URL that has the pattern as a prefix. Behind the scenes, the server runs the handler for each incoming request in a separate goroutine so that it can serve multiple requests simultaneously. However, if two concurrent requests try to update `count` at the same time, it might not be incremented consistently; the program would have a serious bug called a *race condition* (ยง9.1). To avoid this problem, we must ensure that at most one goroutine accesses the variable at a time, which is the purpose of the `mu.Lock()` and `mu.Unlock()` calls that bracket each access of count. We'll look more closely at concurrency with shared variables in Chapter 9.

As a richer example, the handler function can report on the headers and form data that it receives, making the server useful for inspecting and debugging requests:


#### Exercises
- **Exercise 1.12**: Modify the Lissajous server to read parameter values from the URL. For example, you might arrange it so that a URL like `http://localhost:8000/?cycles=20` sets the number of cycles to 20 instead of the default 5. Use the `strconv.Atoi` function to convert the string parameter into an integer. You can see its documentation with go doc `strconv.Atoi`.
